Add Resolved Values and Function Handler sections to formatting (#728)
unicode-org/message-format-wg: spec/formatting.md

  For a message with no _selectors_, this is simple as there is only one _pattern_.
  With _selectors_, this will depend on their resolution.

> - **_<dfn>Formatting</dfn>_** takes the _resolved values_ of the selected _pattern_,

Reviewer: What is the "resolved values" of a pattern? Do you mean a the resolved values **of the placeholders** in a selected pattern?

That is false, however. It takes not the "resolved values", but rather the *formatted values* of the placeholders.

  This is often determined by a user-provided argument of a formatting function call.

- The _function registry_,
  providing the _function handlers_ of the functions referred to by message _functions_.

- Optionally, a fallback string to use for the message if it is not _valid_.

Implementations MAY include additional fields in their _formatting context_.

## Resolved Values

This specification allows for the same value to be used for:
- formatting in a _placeholder_,
- selection with a _selector_,
- as the _operand_ of another _expression_ (including _local declarations_), or
- as an _option_ value in another _expression_,

> To support this, the **_<dfn>resolved value</dfn>_** of each _expression_

Reviewer 2: If we're going to `dfn` _resolved value_ here, we should write a self contained, concise definition, since every occurrence of the term will come here. On a mobile so not suggesting text just now.

is an implementation-dependent value that supports some or all of the above use cases.

In a _declaration_, the _resolved value_ of the _expression_ is bound to a _variable_,
which is available for use by later _expressions_.
Since a _variable_ can be referenced in different ways later,

> implementations SHOULD NOT immediately fully format the value for output.

Reviewer 2: Maybe the key distinction here is that the resolved value and the formatted value are different things?

Reviewer: We actually don't care whether an implementation produces a formatted value that isn't used, so the "SHOULD NOT" is too strong.

Reviewer 2: What I think we're trying to say is: implementations should not replace the variable with the formatted value. Rather, it should replace it with the resolved value. Whether or not it does some formatting eagerly or not is, as @macchiati notes, an internal detail.

There is possibly a relationship between the formatted and resolved value. Consider:

```
.local $a = {zebra :titlecase}
{{{$a}}}
```

... probably prints `Zebra` and probably the resolved value of `$a` is `Zebra`. However:

```
.local $a = {0xbeef :integer}
{{{$a}}}
```

... might print `48,879` and have a resolved value might be an `int` with a value of `0xBEEF` (although we don't support hex literals like that, so you'd actually get a Bad Operand). If the locale were `ar-EG`, though, the formatted value would be `٤٨٬٨٧٩` but the resolved value would still be `(int)0xBEEF`.

So +1 to not SHOULD NOT, but my point is different.

Author: Dropped this phrase, as it's somewhat redundant.

Implementations MAY include additional fields in their _formatting context_.

## Resolved Values

> This specification allows for the same value to be used for:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This specification allows for the same variable reference to be used in multiple parts of a _message_:
```

Author: Would that be clearer, though? Variable references are the mechanism that's used, by the key point here is that it's the same _value_ that's being used for multiple different purposes.

Reviewer 2: I think these are saying kind of the same thing. The thing that's getting us into trouble is an (apparently?) slippery meaning of the word "value".

Reviewer 3: Right, on first read it may seem like "value" means "resolved value". It's complicated by placeholders not being expressions. Otherwise you could say "allows for identical expressions to be used for:"

Author: This text is no longer present in the PR.

> - formatting in a _placeholder_,

Reviewer 4: That's not right, I think. The *result* of formatting is a string or some kind of a "formatted part" type. When talking about resolved values, I think we want to identify the intermediate type that's the result of evaluating the placeholder, before it's formatted.

Reviewer 2: I think the key thing here is the difference between the _output_ of an expression and the _evaluation_ of an expression. The "resolved value" is only important (or even visible) when it will be consumed by another expression later.

I think @stasm is correct that the output of formatting (or selection) is not the "resolved value". In the case of formatting, it is the string representation (or "formatted foo" parts representation), which is different from the "resolved value". Similarly, the output of selection is a filtered and stack ranked list of patterns (which is definitely not the "resolved value").

The "resolved value", to me, means "what is the value of the operand _after_ the expression has been evaluated".

If I have a message `You have {$x :integer} wildebeest`, the _value_ of `$x` is constrained to be an implementation-defined numeric type (it might not be an integer type, even though the formatting function formats it like one), but the output of the expression is a string.

I think that each function needs to explicitly say whether it "covers up" (changes) the operand's resolved value and what it changes it to be. Using my example:

> Function: `:integer`
> * Operand: an implementation-defined type or a literal whose contents match the number-literal production in the ABNF
> * Format output: a string
> * Selection output: number selector (see design number-selection)
> * Resolved value: an implementation-defined numeric type

Notice that this eliminates the string representation between the operand (input) and resolved value. It also, probably, allows the implementation defined type to be changed by the function.

Reviewer: > Operand: an implementation-defined type or a literal whose contents match the number-literal production in the ABNF

There is a third kind of entity that can be an operand.

An operand is a defined type, or literal, _or the "result of a previous functional application"_ (call that a **function-result** for now). A function-result is (logically) not just an implementation-defined datatype. If so, it wouldn't have access to the information that any composing function would need.

Instead, I think the best conceptual model of a function-result is that of an object with methods to get information. Such as (of course, the names can be chosen to protect the innocent):

- getSourceFunction() —the function used to create it
- getSourceOperand() — the operand used to create it
- getsourceOptions() — the options used to create it
- getFormattedString()
- getFormatToPartsStructure()
- getSelector()
- getResolvedValue()

Internally, it can lazy-evaluate. For example, it only needs to generate the formatted string if the method getFormattedString() is called. If the function-result is only used for selection, that never needs to be generated. If the function-result is passed to an :uppercase function, then the getResolvedValue() would never need to be called, etc.

In particular a function can look at its operand, and if it is a function-result, see what options it was passed and use them if the type of the function is known.

The description of a function needs to specify what its inputs are, and how its function-result behaves. Part of that involves specifying which functions it can compose with, and how it treats that function's operand and options.

- selection in a _selector_ _expression_,

> - as the _operand_ of another _expression_, or

Reviewer 2: I think we want to mention declarations explicitly. I think "another" can just be "an" (another presumes there is already an expression...)

```suggestion
- as the _operand_ of an _expression_ (including of a _declaration_), or
```

Author: Why call out declarations as anything special here? Exactly the same sort of processing is done for example in both of the following equivalent messages:
```
.local $foo = {42}
.local $bar = {$foo :number}
{{The answer is {$bar}}}
```

```
.local $foo = {42}
{{The answer is {$foo :number}}}
```

Reviewer 2: The reason is so that declarations are mentioned explicitly. When I made the mental checklist of "places expressions can appear", declarations were missing. This also serves as a reminder of how an expression gets to be the value of an option or operand (as we don't permit nesting).

Reviewer: +1

Author: ```suggestion
- as the _operand_ of another _expression_ (including _local declarations_), or
```

> - as the _option_ value of another _expression_,

Author: I've dropped this list from the PR.

> This specification allows for the same value to be used for:
> - formatting in a _placeholder_,
> - selection in a _selector_ _expression_,
> - as the _operand_ of another _expression_ (including _local declarations_), or
> - as an _option_ value in another _expression_,

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This specification allows for the same interface to be used as:
- a result of evaluating a _placeholder_, before it's formatted,
- a result of evaluating a _selector_ _expression_, before it's selected on,
- as the _operand_ of another _expression_ (including _local declarations_), or
- as an _option_ value in another _expression_,
```

Author: The intent with this paragraph is to communicate about end user capabilities, not about internal implementation details. So this is about being able to use the same value (say, a number passed into the implementation's formatting method as an argument) for multiple purposes.

In the syntax, this is effected by _variable references_, _declarations_, and other syntax features, and in the spec's runtime definition, by _resolved values_.

This proposed change flips the meaning of the text by discussing internal rather than external use cases. It also introduced the term "interface", which further increases the distance from concrete use cases, as well as rooting what follows in an object-oriented approach. This isn't invalid by any means, but it's presuming the reader to have a lot more context than the current text.

Author: Closing as out-of-date.

In _selectors_, the _resolved value_ of an _expression_ is used for _pattern selection_.

In a _pattern_, the _resolved value_ of an _expression_ or _markup_ is used in its _formatting_.

The form that _resolved values_ take is implementation-dependent,
and different implementations MAY choose to perform different levels of resolution.

> While this specification does not require it,
> a _resolved value_ could be implemented by requiring each function implementation to
> return a value matching the following interface:
>
> ```ts
> interface MessageValue {
>   formatToString(): string
>   formatToX(): X // where X is an implementation-defined type
>   getValue(): unknown
>   resolvedOptions(): { [key: string]: MessageValue }
>   selectKeys(keys: string[]): string[]
> }
> ```
>
> With this approach:
> - An _expression_ could be used as a _placeholder_ if
>   calling the `formatToString()` or `formatToX()` method of its _resolved value_
>   did not emit an error.
> - An _expression_ could be used as a _selector_ _expression_ if
>   calling the `selectKeys(keys)` method of its _resolved value_

> >   did not throw an error.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
>   did not emit an error.
```

(consistency)

> - Using a _variable reference_, the _resolved value_ of an _expression_
>   could be used as an _operand_ or _option_ value if

> >   calling the `getValue()` method of its _resolved value_ did not throw an error.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
>   calling the `getValue()` method of its _resolved value_ did not emit an error.
```

The form that resolved values take is implementation-dependent,
and different implementations MAY choose to perform different levels of resolution.

> > While this specification does not require it,
> > a _resolved value_ could be implemented by requiring each function implementation to
> > return a value matching the following interface:

Reviewer 2: I would make this more of a normal example. Perhaps:

```suggestion
> [!NOTE]
> This is an illustration of how an implementation might handle these requirements.
>
> An implementation might provide an interface similar to the following
> that each _function_ is required to return:
```

Author: I'm fine with rephrasing this, but two thoughts:
1. The "This is an illustration..." phrase seems a bit out of place here.
2. Saying that this is what a _resolved value_ could look like is kinda the key point here, and should not be lost.

Author: @aphillips I'm closing this thread as it's outdated, but please open a new one if you think that something here is still actionable.

>
> ```ts
> interface MessageValue {
>   formatToString(): string
>   formatToX(): X // where X is an implementation-defined type
>   getValue(): unknown
>   resolvedOptions(): { [key: string]: unknown }
>   selectKeys(keys: string[]): string[]
> }
> ```
>
> With this approach:
> - An _expression_ could be used as a _placeholder_ if
>   calling the `formatToString()` or `formatToX()` method of its _resolved value_
>   did not throw an error.
> - An _expression_ could be used as a _selector_ _expression_ if
>   calling the `selectKeys(keys)` method of its _resolved value_
>   did not throw an error.

> > - An _expression_ could be used as an _operand_ or _option_ value if

Reviewer 2: Expression here is wrong? You can't put an _expression_ as an operand or option value, but you can reference the annotated value.

Would this actually be "the resolved value of an expression could be used..."?

Author: ```suggestion
> - Using a _variable reference_, the resolved value of an _expression_
>   could be used as an _operand_ or _option_ value if
```

The form that resolved values take is implementation-dependent,
and different implementations MAY choose to perform different levels of resolution.

> While this specification does not require it,
> a _resolved value_ could be implemented by requiring each function implementation to
> return a value matching the following interface:
>
> ```ts

> > interface MessageValue {

Reviewer 6: Overall the direction seems OK.
But I am uneasy with specifying this interface.
Because:
- in "intertwines" even more the formatters and selectors (which I always maintained are different concepts, with different interfaces)
- it is just specified, without explaining how to use it, how it works.

So it feels over-specified.

>   formatToString(): string
>   formatToX(): X // where X is an implementation-defined type
>   getValue(): unknown

> >   resolvedOptions(): { [key: string]: unknown }

Author: As suggested by @catamorphism in https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/728#issuecomment-2174083395

```suggestion
>   resolvedOptions(): { [key: string]: MessageValue }
```

>   selectKeys(keys: string[]): string[]
> }
> ```
>
> With this approach:
> - An _expression_ could be used as a _placeholder_ if
>   calling the `formatToString()` or `formatToX()` method of its _resolved value_

> >   did not throw an error.

Author: You're right; the spec currently tends to use "emit".

```suggestion
>   did not emit an error.
```

> - An _expression_ could be used as a _selector_ _expression_ if
>   calling the `selectKeys(keys)` method of its _resolved value_
>   did not throw an error.
> - Using a _variable reference_, the resolved value of an _expression_
>   could be used as an _operand_ or _option_ value if
>   calling the `getValue()` method of its _resolved value_ did not throw an error.
>   In this use case, the `resolvedOptions()` method could also
>   provide a set of option values that could be taken into account by the called function.
>
> Extensions of the base `MessageValue` interface could be provided for different data types,
> such as numbers or strings,

> > for which the `unknown` return types of `getValue()` and `resolvedOptions()`

Author: ```suggestion
> for which the `unknown` return type of `getValue()` and
> the generic `MessageValue` type used in `resolvedOptions()`
```

The form that resolved values take is implementation-dependent,
and different implementations MAY choose to perform different levels of resolution.

> While this specification does not require it,
> a _resolved value_ could be implemented by requiring each function implementation to
> return a value matching the following interface:
>
> ```ts
> interface MessageValue {
>   formatToString(): string

> >   formatToX(): X // where X is an implementation-defined type

Reviewer 4: I may have missed some discussions about this, but why wouldn't we want to be more specific here about the parts?

```suggestion
>   formatToParts(): IterableIterator<MessagePart>; // MessagePart is implementation-defined.
```

Author: As this is a non-normative example and we've not reached consensus on formatted parts, I'd rather not introduce them here implicitly and somewhat out of context, when the key aspect of the `formatToX()` inclusion is to remind the reader that a string is not the only possible formatting target.

### Literal Resolution

The _resolved value_ of a _text_ or a _literal_ contains
the character sequence of the _text_ or _literal_
after any character escape has been converted to the escaped character.

When a _literal_ is used as an _operand_
or on the right-hand side of an _option_,
the formatting function MUST treat its _resolved value_ the same
whether its value was originally a _quoted literal_ or an _unquoted literal_.

> For example,
> the _option_ `foo=42` and the _option_ `foo=|42|` are treated as identical.

> The resolution of a _text_ or _literal_ MUST resolve with a string value.

Reviewer 2: Not sure about this change? The text or literal is a string, but the resolved value might depend on the function. E.g. `{1234 :number}` had a literal which MUST be a string, but the resolved value is a number? Too pedantic?

Author: Note that in `{1234 :number}` we have two separate resolved values that end up being considered:
1. The resolved value of the _operand_ `1234`.
2. The resolved value of the _expression_ `{1234 :number}`.

This phrase is strictly about the former, as we're requiring that the parsing of the string `'1234'` into a numerical value can only be done by the `:number` function handler.

Reviewer 2: Maybe clearer as:

```suggestion
The _resolved value_ of a _text_ or _literal_ is a string.
```

Author: Actually, we should drop this as it's duplicating the first paragraph of this section. Merge this suggestion if you agree?
```suggestion
```

the formatting function MUST treat its _resolved value_ the same
whether its value was originally _quoted_ or _unquoted_.

> For example,
> the _option_ `foo=42` and the _option_ `foo=|42|` are treated as identical.

The resolution of a _text_ or _literal_ MUST resolve with a string value.

> For example, in a JavaScript formatter
> the _resolved value_ of a _text_ or a _literal_ could have the following implementation:
>
> ```ts
> class MessageLiteral implements MessageValue {
>   constructor(value: string) {
>     this.formatToString = () => value;
>     this.getValue = () => value;
>   }
>   resolvedOptions: () => ({});
>   selectKeys(_keys: string[]) {
>     throw Error("Selection on unannotated literals is not supported");
>   }
> }
> ```

### Variable Resolution

To resolve the value of a _variable_,
its _name_ is used to identify either a local variable or an input variable.
If a _declaration_ exists for the _variable_, its _resolved value_ is used.
Otherwise, the _variable_ is an implicit reference to an input value,
and its value is looked up from the _formatting context_ _input mapping_.

An implemementation MAY choose to wrap or otherwise represent all input values

> using the same representation it uses for all _resolved values_.

Author: Highlighting this addition, which might otherwise be lost among the _resolved value_ link additions.

3. Perform _option resolution_.

4. Call the _function handler_ with the following arguments:

   - The current _locale_.
   - The resolved mapping of _options_.
   - If the _expression_ includes an _operand_, its _resolved value_.

   The form that resolved _operand_ and _option_ values take is implementation-defined.

>    An implementation MAY pass additional arguments to the function,

Reviewer 2: To the function handler?

Author: ```suggestion
   An implementation MAY pass additional arguments to the _function handler_,
```

   as long as reasonable precautions are taken to keep the function interface
   simple and minimal, and avoid introducing potential security vulnerabilities.

5. If the call succeeds,
   resolve the value of the _expression_ as the result of that function call.

   If the call fails or does not return a valid value,
   emit the appropriate _Message Function Error_ for the failure.

   Implementations MAY provide a mechanism for the _function handler_ to provide
   additional detail about internal failures.
   Specifically, if the cause of the failure was that the datatype, value, or format of the
   _operand_ did not match that expected by the _function_,

>    the _function_ might cause a _Bad Operand_ error to be emitted.

Reviewer 2: might => SHOULD ?

Author: ```suggestion
   the _function_ SHOULD cause a _Bad Operand_ error to be emitted.
```

  
   In all failure cases, use the _fallback value_ for the _expression_ as its _resolved value_.

#### Function Handler

To resolve a _function_,
a **_<dfn>function handler</dfn>_** is required.
This is an implementation-defined process such as a function or method

> which accepts a set of arguments and returns a _resolved value_.

Reviewer 2: Same comment as before about `dfn`. The definition is in the second sentence. Lead with that and then require it.

An implementation MAY define its own functions and their handlers.
An implementation MAY allow custom functions to be defined by users.

Implementations that provide a means for defining custom functions
MUST provide a means for _function handlers_
to return _resolved values_ that contain enough information
to be used as _operands_ or _option_ values in subsequent _expressions_.

The _resolved value_ returned by a _function handler_
MAY be different from the value of the _operand_ of the _function_.
It MAY be an implementation specified type.
It is not required to be the same type as the _operand_.

A _function handler_ MAY include resolved options in its _resolved value_.
The resolved options MAY be different from the _options_ of the function.

> A _function handler_ SHOULD emit a

Reviewer 2: Here's that SHOULD!

> _Pattern selection_ is not supported for _fallback values_.

Reviewer 2: Should this be optional?  `*` might match?

Author: If a selector does not support pattern selection, then the `*` variant is selected. A selector is never asked about `*`, that's handled by the selection algorithm directly.

The fact that you need to consider the combined effects of Resolve Preferences 2.ii.b, Filter Variants 2.i.b, and Sort Variants 5.iii.c to see that is what I tried to mean by arguing that "best choice" is too complicated.

Reviewer 2: I went to the context and read the section carefully. I guess I have a few questions.

This text suggests that the fallback state is transitive--that implementations must track if a fallback has occurred. That probably needs to be stated more clearly, if so. Otherwise, the fallback value looks just like a string i.e. a literal, which is what lead to my comment.

Let's use my bad example:

```
.local $a = {0xbeef :num}       // this is Bad Operand with a fallback of `|0xbeef|`
.local $b = {$a :uppercase}     // this might work on `0xbeef`? It's probably Bad Operand if the first line isn't
.match $b                       // let's say :uppercase is a type of string selector too...
48879 {{Definitely not this}}
0xBEEF {{Matches?}}
* {{Could match if above doesn't}}
```

My point is, how does `.match $b` know that its resolved value is a fallback value?

Author: That's a good point. Some of the current text is using "fails to resolve" in a way that's not clear. I'll apply some updates to improve this.
